Draft: IBC middleware (#1193)
cosmos/sdk-tutorials: academy/ibc-dev/ibcmw-integrate.md

# Integrating IBC middleware into a chain

<HighlightBox type="learning">

Learn how to integrate IBC middleware(s) with a base application to your chain. The following document only applies for Cosmos SDK chains.

</HighlightBox>

We've now seen how to develop an IBC middleware, the final step in order to use it is to integrate it into the chain. We can distinguish between a single piece of middleware or a stack of middleware and between middleware that is stateful or stateless.

To integrate our middleware (stack) we must do the following in `app.go`:

> - If the middleware is maintaining its own state and/or processing SDK messages, then it should create and register its SDK module **only once** with the module manager

Reviewer: Note: This is the case where defining the Middleware Module explicitly is required

    ```go
    //app.go

    // create a keeper for the stateful middleware
    mw1Keeper := mw1.NewKeeper(storeKey1)
    mw3Keeper := mw3.NewKeeper(storeKey3)

    // instantiate the middleware as IBCModules
    mw1IBCModule := mw1.NewIBCModule(mw1Keeper)
    mw2IBCModule := mw2.NewIBCModule() // middleware2 is stateless middleware

>     mw3IBCModule := mw3.NewIBCModule(mw3Keeper)

Author: @AdityaSripal do we have to go through this step to instantiate as IBCModule first?

If I have a single middleware not used in a stack, say `mw4`, could I just do the following:

```
mw4Keeper := mw4.NewKeeper(storeKey4)
mw4IBCMiddleware := mw4.NewIBCMiddleware(customIBCModule1, mw4Keeper)
```

or should I still rather do:
```
mw4Keeper := mw4.NewKeeper(storeKey4)
mw4IBCModule := mw4.NewIBCModule(mw4Keeper)
mw4IBCMiddleware := mw4.NewIBCMiddleware(customIBCModule1, mw4Keeper)
```

Reviewer: Thanks for pointing this out Thomas.

`NewIBCMiddleware` is a function defined by each custom middleware, so if it is defined on the middleware you want to use, you can use it to create the final stack that you wish.

Whether or not you need an `AppModule` defined for your middleware really depends on the middleware in question. Defining the module in `app.go` is necessary if you then need to separately wire the `middlewareModule` into app.go's module wiring functions (e.g. InitGenesis/BeginBlock/MsgRouter/etc)

So as a short answer, I would say if you have a **stateful** middleware (or middleware that will execute independent messages) then you will most likely need to define the `middleware` module so that you can wire in all the state tracking/execution logic into app.go.

If you have **stateless** middleware (e.g. a simple filtering mw), then you will not need to define the module, you can simply wrap the underlying application with your middleware

    // register middleware in app module
    // if the module maintains independent state and/or processes sdk.Msgs
    app.moduleManager = module.NewManager(
        ...
        mw1.NewAppModule(mw1Keeper),
        mw3.NewAppModule(mw3Keeper),
        transfer.NewAppModule(transferKeeper),
        custom.NewAppModule(customKeeper)
    )
    
    ```

    <ExpansionPanel title="Example code">
    <!-- TODO: put code above in the expansion panel -->
    </ExpansionPanel>

> - As mentioned in the previous section, in the case where the middleware wishes to send a packet or acknowledgment without the involvement of the underlying application, it should be given access to the same `scopedKeeper` as the base application so that it can retrieve the capabilities by itself.

Author: Should we provide example code how to actually do this? Right now we define `scopedKeepers` but not using them, which looks somewhat confusing...

Reviewer: Yea probably have at least one middleware stack where this is done. The rest do not need their capabilityKeepers defined in the pseudocode

Reviewer: We can explain that they are wrapped in the base application's keeper

        // the involvement of the underlying application
        scopedKeeperTransfer := capabilityKeeper.NewScopedKeeper("transfer")
        scopedKeeperCustom1 := capabilityKeeper.NewScopedKeeper("custom1")
        scopedKeeperCustom2 := capabilityKeeper.NewScopedKeeper("custom2")
        
    ```

    <ExpansionPanel title="Example code">
    <!-- TODO: put code above in the expansion panel -->
    </ExpansionPanel>

- Each application stack must reserve its own unique port with core IBC. Thus two stacks with the same base application must bind to separate ports.

    ```go
        // initialize base IBC applications
        //
        // if you want to create two different stacks with the same base application,
        // they must be given different scopedKeepers and assigned different ports
        transferIBCModule := transfer.NewIBCModule(transferKeeper)
        customIBCModule1 := custom.NewIBCModule(customKeeper, "portCustom1")
        customIBCModule2 := custom.NewIBCModule(customKeeper, "portCustom2")
        
    ```

    <ExpansionPanel title="Example code">
    <!-- TODO: put code above in the expansion panel -->
    </ExpansionPanel>

> - The order of middleware **matters**, function calls from IBC to the application travel from top-level middleware to the bottom middleware and then to the application. Function calls from the application to IBC goes through the bottom middleware in order to the top middleware and then to core IBC handlers. Thus the same set of middleware put in different orders may produce different effects.

Reviewer: We should maybe specify which calls run IBC -> app (the functions defined in `porttypes.AppModule`), and function calls that run app -> IBC (the functions defined in `ICS4Wrapper`)

Reviewer: Ahh I see that you have it defined elsewhere, but maybe its more intuitive if we mention that you can visualize it just by the two interfaces you have to implement?

Author: Oh I never considered that the interface splits up as the direction of information flows. Can add that for sure ;)

      custom.NewAppModule(customKeeper)
  )

  ```

    </ExpansionPanel>

- As mentioned in the previous section, in the case where the middleware wishes to send a packet or acknowledgment without the involvement of the underlying application, it should be given access to the same `scopedKeeper` as the base application so that it can retrieve the capabilities by itself.

    <ExpansionPanel title="Example code">

  ```go
      //app.go

      // add scoped keepers in case the middleware wishes to
      // send a packet or acknowledgment without
      // the involvement of the underlying application
      scopedKeeperTransfer := capabilityKeeper.NewScopedKeeper("transfer")
      scopedKeeperCustom1 := capabilityKeeper.NewScopedKeeper("custom1")
      scopedKeeperCustom2 := capabilityKeeper.NewScopedKeeper("custom2")

  ```

    </ExpansionPanel>

  For example, if the middleware `mw1` needed the ability to send a packet without the underlying application `custom2`, it would have to get access to the latter's `scopedKeeper`:

  ```diff
  - mw1Keeper := mw1.NewKeeper(storeKey1)
  + mw1Keeper := mw1.NewKeeper(storeKey1, scopedKeeperCustom2)

>   ```

Author: @AdityaSripal  is this correct (and sufficient)? Having trouble finding adequate info on this

  mw3IBCModule := mw3.NewIBCModule(mw3Keeper)

  // register middleware in app module
  // if the module maintains independent state and/or processes sdk.Msgs
  app.moduleManager = module.NewManager(
      ...
      mw1.NewAppModule(mw1Keeper),
      mw3.NewAppModule(mw3Keeper),
      transfer.NewAppModule(transferKeeper),
      custom.NewAppModule(customKeeper)
  )

  ```

    </ExpansionPanel>

- As mentioned in the previous section, if the middleware wishes to send a packet or acknowledgment without the involvement of the underlying application, it should be given access to the same `scopedKeeper` as the base application so that it can retrieve the capabilities by itself.

    <ExpansionPanel title="Example code">

  ```go
      //app.go

      // add scoped keepers in case the middleware wishes to
      // send a packet or acknowledgment without
      // the involvement of the underlying application
      scopedKeeperTransfer := capabilityKeeper.NewScopedKeeper("transfer")
      scopedKeeperCustom1 := capabilityKeeper.NewScopedKeeper("custom1")
      scopedKeeperCustom2 := capabilityKeeper.NewScopedKeeper("custom2")

  ```

    </ExpansionPanel>

>   For example, if the middleware `mw1` needed the ability to send a packet without the underlying application `custom2`, it would require access to the latter's `scopedKeeper`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example, if the middleware `mw1` needs the ability to send a packet on custom2's port without involving the underlying application `custom2`, it would require access to the latter's `scopedKeeper`:
```

> # Integrating IBC middleware into a chain

Reviewer 2: @tmsdkeys Here the same issue applies with "acknowledgement". I changed it to American spelling for everything that is not in code tags. Please change accordingly in the code if it does not have to be British English.

  ```go
      // initialize base IBC applications
      //
      // if you want to create two different stacks with the same base application,
      // they must be given different scopedKeepers and assigned different ports
      transferIBCModule := transfer.NewIBCModule(transferKeeper)
      customIBCModule1 := custom.NewIBCModule(customKeeper, "portCustom1")
      customIBCModule2 := custom.NewIBCModule(customKeeper, "portCustom2")

  ```

    </ExpansionPanel>

- **The order of middleware matters**. Function calls from IBC to the application travel from top-level middleware through to bottom-level middleware and then to the application. Function calls from the application to IBC rise from the bottom middleware in order to the top middleware and then to core IBC handlers. Thus the same set of middleware arranged in different orders may produce different effects.

  <HighlightBox type="tip">

  In addition to the diagram shown in the [introduction](./ibcmw-intro.md), also note the direction of information flow through the middleware by looking at the interface:

  ```go
      type Middleware interface {
          IBCModule
          ICS4Wrapper
  }
  ```

>   The packet and channel callbacks defined by `IBCModule` run from IBC Core to the base application; the methods defined by `ICS4Wrapper` run from base application to core IBC.

Reviewer 2: @tmsdkeys "from base application to core IBC" or "from base application to IBC Core". I went for the latter, if this isn't correct please change back if changes are already committed.
